---
title: Self-study for the Un-conscientious
---

Studying things is hard. Motivating yourself to study, and finding the time and
energy to follow through, is much harder. The MOOC revolution of the mid-2010s
was foiled (in my own experience) by how easy it was to simply stop paying
attention and drop out of a class. For years I had only slightly better luck in
my own planning and studying. I'd pick a book/course to follow, make
a schedule, stress the importance of it to myself, seriously attempt to go
through it, and peter out after just a couple weeks. At most, I lasted a month
or two. For the first five years of my PhD things were pretty much the same.
After all my exams were done, everything left to study was long-term and
self-imposed, and I got basically nowhere.

It's been a few more years now and I think I've improved a bit. I thought it'd
be good to write down some things that seem to work for me, both for my own
reference and so maybe others can benefit!

**Content**. King, of course. This is where most of my learning efforts fail.
For me, video lectures are **too slow**. (Yes, I know I can watch at faster
speed, but at that point the hard parts start to become incomprehensible --
lectures are not amenable to skimming). Books are best. Books for general
audiences tend to be more lively, but less informative. Many general audience
books are uselessly soft (like, for instance, anything recommended in
a newspaper). Books need to not be *boring*.  Chapters and sections each should
provide interesting insights that aren't too inaccessible, not just building up
to something mysterious or (worst of all) providing unmotivated background
content.  Small victories in understanding motivate progress, while small
frustrations soon pile up and make it easy to give up completely.  It's really
key to pick the best book possible.

**Rhythm**. In school, I'd always been motivated by competitive pressure and
last-minute deadlines, so on my own with only self-imposed ground rules it's
easy to fall back into just mirroring the school structure. But school syllabi
are primarily built for convenience of assessment, not for understanding. Basic
pedagogical ideas like webs of concepts, connections to real-world problems,
and even such simple things like spaced repetition are skipped entirely or left
up to the students. I think the best I can do here is stay flexible. A fixed
calendar that plods through one chapter at a time can't be adjusted to cover
the same things over and over, or shift to front-load more interesting topics.
Courses tend to be better than books in this way, but they can have problems
too. It's hard to tell if I want to change topics because I'm bored, the topic
is too hard, or I'm just having a lazy day. The best approach I can find here
is just to follow my gut, and skip around and come back to things as I need.

**Repetition**. One of the hardest things I find when studying alone is
deciding when I know a topic well enough to move on. More important than any
particular topic in the learning is staying motivated! There's nothing more
frustrating than getting "stuck" on a seemingly endless stream of busywork, or
conversely getting overwhelmed by difficult problems. The best solution I've
found here is, rather than trying to work through whole books, to pick
realistic-difficulty university courses and follow their content. If I know how
to do all the exercises from a serious online course, I should be all set for
the time being.  MIT OpenCourseWare is particularly good, but plenty of course
content from Stanford, CMU, etc can be found online also.  (Most MOOCs are not
rigorous enough to test much, and don't use standard books either so there
isn't much to work from).

I know that this contradicts my earlier point here about not marching through
school syllabi, and this is still something I don't really know how to resolve.
Reading is fun, but exercises often are not. My goal here is to answer the
question "have I learned this well enough" not necessarily to say that going
through the course in order is the best way to learn it. Whether or not that's
true varies a lot depending on the approach, but usually
a multi-pass/multi-text approach works better for me. Even then it's important
to realize that there's no such thing as knowing something for good, only
learning it for now. Without practicing or building off something, it will
disappear. So it's vitally important to study things that are either inherently
useful or that I'll actually be building from!

**Fun**. Unlike school, there is no real stick, only carrots. People go their
whole lives without studying extra topics. Most of the stuff I want to study
isn't really fun in the same way that, say, video games are. It's satisfying,
but that doesn't really help day to day. Stupid tricks like framing stories and
anecdotes are surprisingly helpful. I should really focus on weird, cartoony
treatments, trashy "fun fact" books, and these sorts of things.  After all,
it's the trashiness of the internet (bite size articles!  Pictures!  Silly
stories!) that makes it so fun to get information from. What books can provide
the same stimulation should still be more reliable and organized.

**(Lack of) Accountability**. This is the part where I'm supposed to say that
you find an different person to serve as your stern taskmaster. These people
are really hard to come by, and really expensive when you do find them. So
maybe I'll just say that trying to motivate myself with accountability doesn't
really seem to work in this setting. There are too many external factors that
can really throw things off, and at the end of the day it's all just my own
ideas. I think instead it's more important to keep reminding myself why I'm
doing this, stay bored enough to give it a try, and make sure to celebrate each
success even if they're disorganized and out-of-order!

**Subconscious**. Something deep down in people loves learning new things.
This is the guiding principle of the unschooling movement. People also find
satisfaction from slowly getting better at things they practice. And people
naturally practice things they think are interesting. Sure, they don't practice
them enough to be truly world-class, but I have an actual day job and don't
need to have world-class expertise in anything I study. I've gone very far in
the past by just picking up things as they interested me.  Perhaps instead of
organized study goals (which have done little beyond get me in trouble, ever
since my organized classes ended) a more long-term productive strategy is to
just gather books, go through parts of them when I feel like it, and slowly
glue concepts together.  Practice problems are good, but it might be best to
just do them for fun -- think "pop quiz" vs "problem set".  Organized study
time might not be as good as just reading what I feel like when I feel like it.
I made it pretty far that way, after all -- and in much less time than people
following the school strategy.

**Boredom**. The problem with relying on people's love of learning new things
is there's too many easy to learn things nowadays. This is the heart of the
information revolution -- tons of interesting stuff. In some ways this is good,
but for creative motivation it's a terrible, terrible thing. Even worse, most
of I find sort of feels like learning but doesn't really teach me anything.
But luckily, if I stay far enough away from them for long enough, I really do
still get bored.  And that's when all the learning and creativity happens!
