# Detox: a reading and study list

"If you gaze long into an abyss, the abyss also gazes into you."

The pandemic has been hard. I'm fine physically but I've slipped into some
dangerous mental habits. I hope this will help.

Without a physical library, lots of the cues and familiarity for reading books
are gone. Instead, I fell in some old traps I set for myself years ago. Now
I'm trying to get back out. I'm learning to use a Kindle, but it's slow going.
I hope writing some things down will help me stay organized.

Remember that:
- Without context, anything sounds reasonable.
- Learning is about real facts and struggling to get real understanding. Watch
  out for the insight.
- It's about doing the exercises, not reading the notes.
- Thinking it all makes sense is near the beginning, not at the end.

(I should've trusted my gut in 2011, but oh well, here we are. It's not too
late!)

### "Not even wrong"
CS:
- Russell & Norvig, *Artificial Intelligence*
- Sutton & Barto, *Reinforcement Learning*
- Hastie et al, *The Elements of Statistical Learning*

Physics:
- Griffiths, *Introduction to Quantum Mechanics*
- Reif, *Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics*

Mathematics:
- Mathematical logic introduction

### "I fear the man of one book"
Philosophy:
- Rorty, *Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature*
- Hollis, *The Philosophy of Social Science*
- Rosenberg, *Philosophy of Social Science*
- Cartwright, *Philosophy of Social Science*
- Kuhn, *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*
- Popper, *The Logic of Scientific Discovery*
- Longino, *Science as Social Knowledge*
- Lewens, *The Meaning of Science*
- Barker & Kitcher, *Philosophy of Science*
- Lloyd, *The Man of Reason*
- Foucault, *Madness and Civilisation*
- hooks, *Feminist Theory*
- Ahmed, *Living a Feminist Life*
- Alcoff, *Visible Identities*
- Feyerabend, *Against Method*

History:
- Mann, *1491*
- Outram, *The Enlightenment*
- Tucker, *The Funding of Scientific Racism*
- James, *The Black Jacobins*
- Hobsbawm, *Nations and Nationalism Since 1780*
- Fischer, *Albion's Seed*
- *Oxford History of the United States*

AA:
- Karabel, *The Chosen*
- Weyl, *The Geography of American Achievement*
- Espenshade & Walton, *No Longer Separate, Not Yet Equal*
- Synnott, *The Half-Opened Door*
- Ho, *Liquidated: An Ethnography of Wall Street*

Human Biology:
- Henrich, *The Secret of Our Success*
- Michell, *Measurement in Psychology*
- Rutherford, *A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived*
- Gould, *The Mismeasure of Man*
- Stanovich, *What Intelligence Tests Miss*
- Buller, *Adapting Minds*
- Damasio, *Descartes' Error*
- Fuentes, *Race, Monogomy, and Other Lies They Told You*
- Marks, *Is Science Racist?*
- Marks, *Human Biodiversity*
- Mackintosh, *IQ and Human Intelligence*
- Flynn, *ntelligence and How to Get It*

Media:
- Friel, *The Record of the Paper*
- Herman and Chomsky, *Manufacturing Consent*
- Parenti, *Inventing Reality*

Design:
- Alexander, *Notes on the Synthesis of Form*
- Alexander, *A Pattern Language*
- Scott, *Seeing Like a State*

Politics:
- Gurri, *The Revolt of the Public*
- Coates, *The Case for Reparations*
- Cowen, *The Complacent Class*
- DiAngelo, *White Fragility*
- Alexander, *The New Jim Crow*
- Frank, *Rendezvous with Oblivion*
- Graeber, *Debt*
- Marshall, *Don't Even Think About It*
- Klein, *This Changes Everything*
- Klein, *No Logo*
- Marx, *Capital*
- Engels, *Socialism*
- Cesaire, *Discourse on Colonialism*
- Fanon, *The Wretched of the Earth*
- Mao, *Quotations from Chairman Mao*
- Srinicek & Williams, *Inventing the Future*

Rhetoric:
- Heinrichs, *Thank You for Arguing*
- Pigliucci, *Nonsense of Stilts*
- Corbett & Connors, *Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student*

### "Nothing new under the sun"
- The Bible
- Great books lists (eg SJC, Adler, Wise Bauer)
- Real major curricula in history, philosophy, etc.

### "Idle hands do the devil's work"
Theory and inspiration:
- The War of Art
- Creativity book list

Concrete topics:
- Rainbow parentheses
- Real Robot Challenge
- Kaggle ongoing
- ICFP programming contest
- MIT 6.006/6.046 Algorithms
- Stanford CS 221A / MIT 6.034 AI
- Stanford CS 230s sequence (230, 231N, 233, 234, 276, 330, ...)
- Parallel algorithms
- Applied mathematics

### "All work and no play"
- Wallace, *Infinite Jest*
- Adam Levin, *Instructions*
- Adam Levin, *Bubblegum*
- Toole, *A Confederacy of Dunces*
- Diaz, *The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao*
- Chopin, *Awakening*
- Bujold, *Shards of Honor*
- Lem, *Solaris*


### "A cure worse than the disease"
- https://old.reddit.com/r/SneerClub/
- http://www.n-gate.com/

Also:
- Neil Postman
- Nicholas Carr
- Evgeny Morozov
- Rolf Dobelli
