## Symptoms of Internet Use

I've spent very little time online over the past few weeks. Today I was
fortunate enough to have some extra time on my hands and immediately indulged
myself in my usual online habits. While I enjoyed myself in the moment (I
think) my physical feelings aftewards were very unpleasant. I ran into the same
thing last time I had a significant period away from web surfing/browsing, in
early 2019. From what I remember the symptoms are pretty much the same and
I wanted to write them down.

Physical:
- Heart beating faster, Seems to start while
  I'm already online but it's difficult to pinpoint exactly when. This
  takes a long time to settle down (more than 1 hour).
- Mild chest pain. Enough to be noticeable while doing other activities
  afterwards. Also starts while I'm online.
- Eyes feel very tired, much more than after other computer use. This is
  probably not content-related but more because I don't take enough breaks
  compared to other activities.
- Cold extremeties -- similarly.
- Minor symptoms of weak immune response: canker sores, etc.
Mental:
- Significantly stronger feeling of uncertainty. Internal mental critic
  is more negative and more vocal.
- Strong feeling of lost creativity. I had many ideas and books I was thinking
  about only
  yesterday, but they seem difficult to remember, like it was longer ago. When
  I do think of them, it's in a very detached way, without the excitement I felt
  originally. It's
  much harder to feel like I'm a part of what's going on.
- Loss of optimism and personal agency. I feel a lot more helpless and have
  difficulty with my own actions that are structured in a long-term planned way.
- Harder to fall asleep.

I've never quit computer use cold turkey, but both times these symptoms crop up
after my first reexposure to the "most addictive part" of the internet -- blogs,
aggregators, comment chains, forums, feeds, etc.

I'm not sure if these are only because of new exposure after a long period of
disuse -- it takes time to be "acclimated" to web surfing -- or if they
continue forward and I simply get used to the effects. The latter scenario
seems very serious for my physical and mental health.

At no point since I was very young have I genuinely stayed off the internet for
an extended period of time. However, periods in which my access was more
limited (could only get to it in libraries, a roommate's room, Starbucks, etc)
do appear to coincide with times when I was more energetic, confident in my
future, self-directed, etc, and executed long-term plans more effectively. In
particular I was exceptionally productive from 2009--2012 as well as in 2016
and the first part of 2019. This may be correlative not causal. It may also be
causal but highly self-reinforcing/positive feedback based depending on how
other parts of my life are doing. The time frame also line up with other
self-directed activities (cooking, etc).

However, I should also note that these times also coincide with significant
negative symptoms. I suppose these are "Symptoms of Internet Non-Use". They are
less acute but do gradually increase over time.

Physical:
- Exercise is more difficult. Physical tasks are more engaging but also more
  challenging.
Mental:
- Lots of out-loud internal dialogue. Internal conversations are less critical
  but significantly more frequent.
- Positive and negative past events pop into mind significantly more often.
  Memories are very vivid and negative events in particular can be difficult.
- Emotions are less stable. Highly positive and highly negative emotions all
  much more common. This can be very extreme.
- Less desire to socialize. Less confidence when socializing -- more "shy
  awkward" as opposed to "outgoing awkward." This can also be extreme.
- Easier to go to bed and fall asleep, but more difficult to stick to
  a specific schedule while awake. Priorities tend to wander.

Again, this may be correlative not causal.
